Many of us are concerned
about how to care well for aging parents,
not only because of what it says
in the quoted portion of today’s text
but also because of the phrase
at the end of 1 Timothy 5:4.
If you tap the citation
at the end of today’s text,
you get the rest of the verse,
namely,
“for this is acceptable
in God’s sight.”
And that tells us
just how important a matter this is.
Notice the Interlinear rendering.
The term translated
“godly devotion” is literally
“to be revering well,”
which could denote
being generally virtuous
toward anyone.
And perhaps that’s why
a number of translations
in our list here in JW Library
simply say “to show piety.”
Still others,
such as The Jerusalem Bible,
render the term
“to do their duty.”
But honoring our parents
is more than just
our duty toward humans.
It’s more than just virtue
for its own sake.
The verse itself says,
“this is acceptable in God’s sight.”
So we love our parents, yes.
They deserve our care, yes.
That’s virtuous, of course.
But principally,
we care for our aging parents
because we revere Jehovah.
We care about what Jehovah
says is right conduct
toward family members.
It’s a matter
of godly devotion.
So, what are some
of the factors to keep in mind?
Our commenters
have helped us so much.
The comments point out
that “exactly how
children provide care varies”
because situations vary.
But here are four
practical things we can do.
First, communicate.
Second,
determine the real needs.
Third,
have reasonable expectations.
And fourth, always remember
to throw your burden on Jehovah.
First, turn, please,
to Proverbs chapter 15
and verse 22.
Communicate,
communicate, communicate.
And what does this result in?
It says:
“Plans fail when there is
no consultation,
“but there is
accomplishment
through many advisers.”
So keep in touch
—call, write, email, text, Skype
—once a week, more often,
especially as they age.
Satisfy their spiritual needs.
Keep them apprised
of what is going on at Bethel
and the rich treasures
you enjoy here in your service.
Care for their emotional needs
by reminding them
just how valuable they are.
But regarding
their material needs,
it’s important to ask
the right questions.
It’s easy to conclude
they’re doing OK.
But this is where
the many advisors come in.
Keep in touch with other family members,
the local congregation.
Get the whole story.
True, the sheer multiplicity
of counselors
doesn’t in itself
guarantee accurate data.
A majority can be wrong.
That’s why Exodus 23:2 cautions us
against just going along with the crowd.
However, when we’re trying
to make important decisions,
we need to get a clear picture
of what’s actually going on in their lives.
And that leads to our second point:
Determine the real needs.
Notice what it says here
in Proverbs 14:15.
Some parents have made
wise provision for their old age
—pensions, insurance,
retirement funds.
But what if these run out,
then what?
Time to quit?
Get a house?
It’s good
that we honor our parents,
and never would we want
to treat them with contempt.
That’s exactly
what Jesus condemned.
And yet, in some cases,
we have to think
about what it says
in Proverbs 14:15.
Notice what
it says at the end:
“The shrewd one
ponders each step.”
Family Happiness, page 176
raises 11 pertinent questions.
It says: ‘Suppose . . . your elderly mother
is having difficulty living alone
‘and you think she might benefit
from moving in with you . . .
‘You might consider . . . :
What are her actual needs?
‘Are there private
or state-sponsored support services
‘that offer an acceptable
alternative solution?
‘Does she want to move?
‘If she does, in what ways
will her life be affected?
‘Will she have to leave
friends behind?
‘How might this
affect her emotionally?
‘Have you talked
these things over with her?
‘How might such a move
affect you, your mate . . . ?
‘If your mother needs care,
who will provide it?
‘Can the responsibility
be shared?
Have you discussed the matter
with all those directly involved?’
In one of the most touching
accounts on this subject,
John 19:26, 27,
we read that Jesus
when he “saw his mother
“and the disciple whom he loved
standing nearby, he said to his mother:
“‘Woman, see!
Your son!’
“Next he said
to the disciple: ‘See!
“Your mother!’
“And from that hour on,
the disciple took her
into his own home.”
Yes, despite all that was weighing
on Jesus’ shoulders
at that precise moment,
not to mention
the incredible pain he was enduring,
he took the time
to take care of his mother.
But what did he do?
Did he summon
12 legions of angels
and postpone his execution?
No, he delegated responsibility
to a relative
and not his brothers,
because they apparently
were not yet believers.
What an amazing example
of balancing the real needs
of all concerned!
Well, that brings us
to our third point:
Have reasonable expectations
of our parents,
of our relatives,
of the congregation.
First Corinthians 16:14 says:
“Let everything you do
be done with love”
—beautiful text.
Now the responsibility
rests primarily
upon each Christian
to care for his own household.
Children, grandchildren,
other close relatives
display Christian love
by providing assistance
to the elderly and infirm ones
according to their needs.
But congregations
of Jehovah’s Witnesses
do not weaken
this personal responsibility
by taking over.
The Bethel family is really
to be commended for the variety of ways
in which you are shouldering
this very heavy responsibility.
How this must please Jehovah!
And that leads
to our final point:
Remember to throw
your burdens on Jehovah.
As pointed out in our comments,
Jehovah “can bless
“any Scriptural decision
and make it work.”
How encouraging
those words are!
And then it cites
Numbers 11:23:
‘The hand of Jehovah
is not short.’
Only our lack
of trust in Jehovah
would limit
what he will do for us.
And although
Jehovah can work miracles,
we don’t expect that we will never
have to participate in the solution
of giving care
to our aging parents.
Why not?
Because by learning to ‘practice
godly devotion in our own households,’
we have the opportunity
to show the depth
of our unselfish motives
in serving Jehovah,
and that proves
the Devil a liar.
Nevertheless,
notice this encouraging promise
at Psalm 145:18:
“Jehovah is near
to all those calling on him,
“to all who call
on him in truth.
“He satisfies the desire
of those who fear him;
“he hears their cry for help,
and he rescues them.”
Jehovah helps.
Maybe you yourself
are the instrument
in Jehovah’s hands to make sure
that your parents are well cared for.
Your work
may actually be the expression
of Jehovah’s love in answer
to your parent’s prayers.